[THEME MUSIC]
>> Hi, It's James here
from "Food Matters,"
and today we have an
extra-special guest for you.
His name is Rich Roll, and
this gentleman's transformation
story is like none of you
have ever heard before.
He went from being addicted
to fast food and on the couch,
to being one of the most
respected ultra distance
athletes in the world.
And his story will have so
many profound impacts for you
from a perspective of
food and also mindset.
It's going to be a great chat.
>> Rich, how are you?
>> I'm good.
I'm so excited to talk to you.
>> I know.
Same here.
I want to take us
back to the beginning
of your transformation.
And to me, I love
your transformation,
because there's a common thread
in a lot of transformations.
Started with pain.
Tell me about what it was like
living that old life of yours,
being that old you,
and that wake-up
call that you had to
transform your life.
>> Yeah, pain is the ultimate
motivator, is it not?
Yeah, throughout my 30s,
I was a corporate lawyer,
doing my best to
climb that ladder
towards the American dream.
And I think that I had spent the
better part of my life chasing
that American dream
without ever really
mindfully thinking about what
I wanted to do with my life.
And I'm a very persistent,
diligent, hardworking
individual.
And I have a history of
addiction and alcoholism.
And I'd gotten sober at 31, and
in the wake of that experience,
having sort of
decimated my life,
I was very intent on
rebuilding and repairing it
and kind of getting
back on track.
And I threw all of those
addictive tendencies
into my profession,
so I was working 60-
to 80-hour weeks for many
years, and I wasn't taking
care of myself physically.
I'd become a junk food addict.
I was not exercising
at all despite the fact
that I'd been a
swimmer in college.
And so by the time I was 39,
I was 50 pounds overweight.
I was never morbidly obese.
I was just kind of like
a chunky guy, a guy who
looks like he's
probably spending
too much time riding elevators
and working in an office.
And it all caught
up to me shortly
before my 40th birthday.
I think beyond kind of just
being overweight and not
treating myself very kindly,
I was also very depressed.
I was unenthusiastic
about this path in life
that I thought
that I had chosen,
but I feel like
now in retrospect
chose me more than I chose it.
And there was a lot of
confusion in my life
about what I was doing.
I was sort of in freefall.
And that collided
with the health scare
late one evening as
I was making my way
up a simple flight of stairs,
where I literally had to pause.
I was so winded, I could not
complete just a simple flight
of stairs without
taking a break.
And I had tightness in my
chest, and shortness of breath,
and sweat on my brow and
really, like, fear in my heart
that I was on the precipice
of having a heart incident.
Heart disease runs in my family.
My grandfather, who
also was a champion
swimmer in his own right, had
died at an early age of a heart
attack, and my whole life
my mother would say you,
gotta watch what you
eat and be careful.
But it's kind of like blah,
blah, blah when you're young.
But it all became very crystal
clear to me in that moment,
not only that I needed to
change how I was living,
how I was behaving,
how I was prioritizing
my time and my energy,
but also that I
wanted to make that change.
I had a willingness to
take a leap of faith
and try something different.
>> At that moment, was it clear
to you that you had a pathway
as to what to do next?
I mean, it's not normally clear.
How did you develop an
idea about the next step
to take when you had
this motivator of pain?
>> Yeah, it's funny.
When you look backwards in
time from where I sit now,
it all makes perfect sense and
looks like those dominoes line
up perfectly.
But I can tell you, in the midst
of that experience it was all
very confusing.
There was no clear path.
All I was doing was trying to
make the next best decision
and trying to learn
along the way.
I was clear that
I needed to change
my relationship with
food, and so that
was my first order of business.
And the first thing that I
did was a seven-day fruit
and vegetable juice cleanse,
which was crazy at the time.
It was so out of left field from
anything I'd ever experienced.
I'd never gone a single
day in my entire life
without eating solid food.
But I knew that that was
something that would kind
of shock me out of my habits.
It didn't have to do with
detoxing or any of that,
I just needed to do something
extreme to kind of reframe
my relationship with food.
And it was very
effective in that regard.
Over that seven-day
period I can remember
lying on the couch, being
listless and sweating
and thinking, how am I going
to make it through the day?
But the remarkable
thing is that at the end
of that one-week period, I
felt completely revitalized.
I had a resurgence of vitality
and energy and mental clarity
that I hadn't experienced
since I was a young person.
And it made it very
clear to me just how
potent the foods that
we're taking into our body
are, and the relationship to
how we feel and how we behave
and how we think and how
we interact with others.
And so that sort of catalyzed
the interest and the intention
to look a little bit
more deeply into food.
And that was certainly not a
linear path for me whatsoever.
I was kind of all over the
map, trying different things--
unsuccessfully for
the most part--
and played that out
for six or seven months
before I finally
decided that I was
going to try a 100% plant-based
diet, which was something
that I was not
excited about doing.
It was kind of the
last box to check
before going back to eating
cheeseburgers and saying,
I tried everything.
And I didn't have
high expectations
that it would make me
feel any different.
I was in search
of trying to feel
like I did on that seventh
day of that cleanse.
Like, how can I eat
on a daily basis
that will allow me to have
that sense of vitality?
I was trying to recapture that.
And what I discovered was
that within a week or 10 days
of adopting a 100% whole
food, plant-based diet,
that I was able to
recapture that feeling.
I felt incredible.
And that's when I knew I'd kind
of haphazardly and imperfectly
stumbled into something that
was quite powerful for me.
And at the time, this was
before "Forks Over Knives"
and before the Engine 2 diet.
There was certainly plenty
of resources available to me
at the time, but there was not
the awareness in a mainstream
context that we have today.
>> When you first transitioned
to this plant-based diet,
were you eating a
vegan junk food diet?
Or were you eating a
real plant foods diet?
I mean, you come off
a seven-day cleanse,
but I just know
that so many people
when they transition
they're like, I'm a vegan.
And it's like, well,
they're a junk food vegan.
And there's so many
different takes on that.
How was your experimentation
with these different sort
of delineations of
plant-based diet,
and how did you settle on being
at the stage you're at now?
Or at that stage
that prepared you
to tackle some of these
events that you got to?
>> It's never been easier
to be a junk food vegan,
and I think there's a lot of
confusion where we conflate
a vegan diet with health
without really appropriately
understanding the difference
between what is a real
healthful food and
what is a junk food.
And I had to learn that the hard
way in my six- or seven-month
experimentation with a
variety of different diets.
I kind of had settled
into a vegetarian diet,
but my version of
a vegetarian diet
was Pizza Hut pizza
without the pepperoni.
You know, Taco Bell burritos,
just keep the meat off it.
A lot of, like, processed grains
and potato chips and things
like that.
And when I-- sort
of playing that out,
there I was back on the
couch, lazier than ever,
more dissatisfied
than ever, feeling
like I did before that
staircase episode.
So I realized that's
not going to work.
So when I made the decision
to go 100% plant-based,
I did it without the junk food.
So I made that leap
from the get-go
and cleared out all of the
processed foods from the mix.
I wasn't like, no oil or super
low fat or anything like that,
but I basically eradicated
99% of the culprit foods
that would be categorized
as vegan junk food.
And that agreed with
me, and that works.
It's interesting, though.
I've been doing this
11 years, and now we
see the rise and
the advent of all
of these amazing
plant-based alternatives
to many meat and dairy products.
And there's a wide
spectrum in terms
of which of those are healthy
and which of those would really
fall under a junk food category.
But it's very easy
to delude yourself
when you're at the market
and you see these things
and you go, oh,
well, it's vegan,
it must be good for you, right?
It must be great.
And I plead guilty to enjoying
those foods from time to time,
but my guiding
principle, my north star
is really plant-based foods as
close to their natural state
as possible.
>> So after this
transformation, you're a lawyer,
so you're typically
sitting at your desk a lot.
And then what was it that welled
up inside of you that said,
I want to do a triathlon?
Or even have this idea
of doing the EPIC5?
I mean, these are
not small feats.
I mean, how did you
build up this idea
of wanting to do that?
>> Well, it was a
couple of things.
I mean, first of all,
it evolved over time.
It wasn't like, oh,
I went plant-based,
then the next day I thought,
I'm going to do Ultraman.
[LAUGHS] It didn't
quite happen like that.
But I will say this.
After adopting a
plant-based diet,
I did have this
resurgence in vitality.
And I had all this
energy for the first time
in as long as I could remember.
So the impulse to actually
move myself physically
occurred to me,
which is something
I hadn't felt in a while also.
And so I started exercising
again, first very casually,
but I realized very quickly
that I enjoyed that.
And it was a big part of
what I was about as a child,
and something that
I loved very much
and had really
lost touch with it.
So the first year
was really connecting
with that part of who I am
that I had kind of repressed
for the sake of,
well, now I'm an adult
and adults don't
do these things.
So it was really
nothing more than that.
But I think what it evolved
into was this pursuit of trying
to unlock hidden potential.
In a very short period
of time after changing
my relationship with food, I
had completely transformed.
I lost 50 pounds.
I looked different.
I felt different.
It was quite radical, and
yet the changes that I made
were relatively simple.
And the thought
occurred to me, if I
could change this drastically,
this dramatically,
in such a short
period of time, what
are the other areas of my life
that I'm overlooking, where I'm
sitting on top of
mountains of potential
that I'm just not
consciously aware of?
And that's what lured me
into the world of triathlon
initially, and ultimately into
ultra endurance athletics,
because I think it's a
beautiful, robust template
to test human potential,
not just physically,
but mentally, emotionally,
and spiritually as well.
>> Yeah.
It's a testing ground that
very few people play with,
and for you to be
able to take that step
to do that is remarkable.
Tell me a little bit about
what events sort of unfolded
as you started practicing
these triathlons,
and then leading up to
basically the EPIC5, which is
a pretty wild, wild experience.
Tell me about what led
up to that and then
how you convinced yourself
that that was a fun idea.
>> Yeah, I mean, it's also a
very non-linear journey that
had its ups and downs and
many mistakes along the way.
Like I mentioned, I was
a swimmer in college,
so I had that background.
And I knew how to
train and push myself.
And as I sort of got
fitter and more invested
in this food adventure
that I was on,
I started getting more
interested in fitness
in general.
And I had unfinished business
as a competitive swimmer,
because alcoholism really
derailed that career
and I never felt like I achieved
my potential as an athlete.
And so here I was
at 40, 41 years old,
having this kind of Renaissance
experience and thinking, well,
maybe I can be
competitive again.
Let's give this a go and
see what I'm capable of.
And I always was
interested in triathlon.
I'd never raced
a bike, I'd never
really done any running
other than casual jogging
here and there.
And so I threw
myself into it, and I
thought, how hard can it be?
I know how to
train as a swimmer.
And I sort of just created this
self-styled training program
in this vacuum of my
mind and went at it.
And I remember I did a couple
sprint triathlons that,
you know, I was a
middle-of-the-packer.
There was no
indication that I was
going to be some kind of
crazy ultra endurance athlete.
And then I stepped it up to
do a half Ironman distance
triathlon.
It was a Wildflower race.
And I think this was 2007.
And that was a disaster.
Like, I just got out of the
swim, I threw up everywhere.
You know, got on my
bike and tried to ride,
and everyone just
whizzed past me
and I couldn't keep
pace with anybody.
And when the bike
ride was over, I
cramped up so much
I couldn't run
and I just had to
pull out of the race.
So my point being that
there was no indication
that I was going to have
this future as an athlete.
But I just kept at it,
and I hired a coach,
and I got more and
more interested
and I got more and more
scientific in my approach
not just to training, but to
how the foods I was eating
were playing into
that equation as well.
And set a course.
You know, I read this article
about this crazy race Ultraman.
It was like a light switch went
off in my mind and I thought,
that's the race for me.
It made no sense.
It's not logical at all.
My only experience in
trying to do anything other
than a sprint triathlon
ended up in total failure,
so I had no business, really,
to responsibly entertain
the prospect of trying
something so difficult.
But it kind of--
it defied rationality.
It was more like this
bizarre calling that I felt.
Like it just felt right.
When I read this article
about this race, Ultraman,
which is a double Ironman
distance triathlon that
circumnavigates the entire
big island of Hawaii
over three days--
it's 320 miles, it's
absolutely bananas--
I was like, that's
what I'm doing.
And I could see myself
in my mind lining up
at the start line, like I
knew it was going to happen.
It was like a foregone
conclusion, despite the fact
that it made no
sense whatsoever.
And that's what happened.
It's crazy.
>> So you did this
ultramarathon,
and you placed
quite well, I think.
I think you were, like, sixth
or sixteenth or something?
>> Well, my first Ultraman,
I really just went--
2008 was my first Ultraman,
and I had one goal.
And that goal was, don't die.
I was not trying
to win anything.
And I was very conservative in
my approach and very conscious
that I was a newcomer
in this sport.
But I ended up
being, I think I was
the second-fastest American.
I think I was 11th
overall that year.
And far exceeding
my expectations
and the expectations of everyone
else involved in the event.
So I thought, what would happen
if I trained a whole year
and went back to that race fully
prepared with some experience?
And so in 2009
that's what I did.
And I was the fastest
American that year
and was sixth overall.
>> Wow.
After that experience, is
that when you decided, great,
now I'm going to step
it up and do this EPIC5?
I mean, every step seems like
a crazy idea, even crazier
than the one before it.
>> Well, Ultraman was really
driven by this question,
this quest that I was on, which
was to determine the outer
limits of my capabilities,
physically, mentally,
emotionally, and spiritually.
You know, what am
I truly capable of
if I really put it on
the line and test myself?
And I felt like that race,
that Ultraman race in 2009,
I walked away from
that race feeling
like I had answered
that question for myself
and that I didn't need
to explore any further,
and I would have been perfectly
content to hang it up and say,
OK, on to the next thing.
But what happened was
my friend Jason Lester,
who was a training
partner of mine
and a fellow
competitor in Ultraman,
a very inspiring
individual who does
these crazy races
without the functional
use of his right arm.
He's a challenge
athlete, and he's
gone on to do amazing
things, and it was his idea.
He said, I have this idea for
this crazy thing I want to do.
I'm calling it EPIC5,
and it involves
doing five Ironman triathlons
on five Hawaiian Islands
and completing it in five days.
And so he solicited my
participation in this thing.
At first I was like,
I'm not doing that.
You know, I'll help you
out, but that exceeds what
I'm capable of, and I'm good.
But he sort of kept after
me, and ultimately I
realized that perhaps
I had not answered
that question for myself.
Perhaps there was more
work to be done and and
depths to be mined.
And so I agreed
to do it in 2010.
We set out to do this crazy
thing that no one had ever
attempted before,
let alone completed,
and we accomplished it.
It took us a little bit
longer than five days.
We ran into all kinds of
crazy obstacles and things
that I talk about in my
book, but ultimately we
were successful in
completing five Ironmans
on five Hawaiian islands.
We did it in about
six and a half days.
>> It was just the two of you?
>> Just the two of us.
We had a ragtag crew of
volunteers and people
that were helping us out, so
it wasn't just us in isolation,
but we were the two people
that actually did it, yeah.
>> You would have had to have
some crazy jokes or funny
things you say to yourself
to just crack you out
of the seriousness of the
level of what you were doing.
I mean, how did you stay sane
in some of those processes?
Like, did you sing a
Stevie Wonder song?
(SINGING) Just the two of us.
>> There were more than a few
trying moments, I can tell you.
And the biggest factor
was sleep deprivation,
because we had to get
off the island every day.
And we would have to
time these so that we
would get on the airplane the
last flight off the island
to get to the next island,
and check into the hotel,
and all that kind of stuff.
So ultimately we were not
getting very much sleep,
and that really started to take
its toll the fourth and fifth
day.
But the moments of
levity were really
Jason, you know, every
time we'd hit an obstacle,
Jason would say, that's why
it's called a challenge.
It's like, what did you
think you were going to do?
Nothing was going to go wrong?
Like, our bikes broke, we met
every conceivable obstacle
along the way.
And I definitely was--
my emotions were
tested to the limit,
beyond the breaking
point a couple of times.
Jason, I would say,
I have to give him
credit for being much
more composed than I
was throughout the adventure.
>> So when you reflect
on your epic journey,
and all the things
that you've achieved,
and now the work that you're
doing with the books and with
your wife, how do you sort of
relate these epic experiences
and these ultra distance feats
to somebody who might just be
looking for where you were
looking at first stage,
just to get off the couch?
I mean, how do you make your
story relatable for people?
>> I think that we are all--
all of us, without exception--
sitting on top of mountains
of untapped human potential
just waiting to be
unlocked and unleashed.
And quite frankly, as
Henry David Thoreau said
so eloquently back in
1888 or whenever it was,
I truly believe the
mass of men lead
lives of quiet desperation.
And what is
considered resignation
is confirmed desperation.
I think it was true in his time,
I think it's probably more true
now.
There are so many people who are
dissatisfied with their lives.
They're living their lives
reactively, compulsively,
and not mindfully
or consciously.
And it's really not
even their own fault.
We are living all in
this system that's
set up to drive us
onto career paths
that we're not consciously
choosing for ourselves,
or that are out of alignment
with who we truly are,
our authentic blueprint.
And I was lucky enough
to wake up at 40
and embark upon this journey.
And my responsibility
with what I've experienced
is to share the facts and the
emotions of that experience
with others in hopes that I can
help to activate and catalyze
their version of what
I've experienced.
Of course, not everyone wants to
be an ultra endurance athlete.
It's not about that.
Ultraman, EPIC5, these
things that I've done,
I consider them to be
allegories or metaphors
for that untapped
human potential.
And so my hope is
that people can
look at those
experiences and my story,
and draw inspiration from that
to then examine their own lives
under a microscope, to better
identify what it is within them
that has gone unaddressed.
That spark, that
little flame of passion
that perhaps has been
kindling in the soul,
yet unaddressed for too long.
And the work that
I do, whether it's
through the podcast or
the books or the speaking,
is to encourage people to pay
attention to that little voice
there and to bring expression
to that in your own life,
and in so doing, to perhaps
connect with yourself more
deeply, and ultimately express
a more authentic version of who
you are so that you can
live more fulfilled and more
purposeful and more content.
>> Wow.
So you're not just about food.
>> No, but food's
a big part of it.
Food is a very important
piece in this puzzle.
It should not be overlooked.
But it's not the only piece.
For me, I look at food
as the initial portal
that brought me into a
universe of personal growth
and exploration.
Had I not changed my
relationship with food,
I'd probably still be eating
cheeseburgers at the law firm,
right?
And by changing the vibration of
what I was putting in my body,
it activated
something in me that
gave me a sense of self-care and
a deeper connection with who I
am that has then forged, or
encouraged, this path forward.
So I think everybody
can have their version
of that experience if you're
more mindful about the choices
you're making three
times a day about what
you're putting in your mouth.
>> Very well said.
Very well said.
In reflecting back
on your journey
and this transformation,
you've centered it
around food and then
these sort of step
by step, sort of
haphazardly finding your way
into doing an EPIC5 in a way.
But when you reflect back on it,
were there any specific mindset
rituals or things that you
did that you're like, wow,
if I hadn't done that, it
wouldn't have probably added up
to what it was?
One thing you
touched on, you said
that you visualized being
at the starting line.
I know that visualization
is a big thing
for a lot of athletes.
You know, Carl
Lewis used to do it,
Arnold Schwarzenegger
used to do it.
Novak Djokovic built a trophy
when he was six years old,
and imagined winning
Wimbledon and becoming
number one in the world, and
he did it on the same day,
some 15 years later.
I mean, there is a lot
to be said about it.
Do you look back
and consider there's
a lot of sort of
mindfulness, visualization
components to your journey
that were important?
>> Yeah, absolutely,
without question.
Visualization, absolutely key.
It's something I learned as a
very young person in swimming
and it's something that I've
practiced my entire life,
and it's incredibly powerful.
You know, time is a
social construct, right?
Time is not a universal fact.
And I think when you
deeply invest yourself
in visualization practices,
to immerse yourself
in the experience of what it's
like to participate in whatever
it is you're seeking to
participate in or succeed at,
what happens is, you step into
this knowingness, the sense
that it has already occurred.
That the work is done and
your job is just to show up.
And I think that allows
you to then show up
without the anxiety and
the stress and the worry,
and anchor yourself
in the present.
So visualization really for me
is a pathway into mindfulness
and presence, the ability to
be truly in the moment of what
you're doing without the
idle chatter of the thinking
mind that's talking you out
of whatever it is that you're
trying to accomplish.
So visualization is key.
But I think in order
for the visualization
to really take root and have
the impact that you're seeking,
you have to be an active,
consistent meditator.
Meditation is
absolutely crucial.
It allows you to gain the
upper hand and the control
over that thinking brain
and that idle chatter,
and allows you to
be fully immersed
in that present moment.
And as an athlete, that's key.
You can't enter that flow
state that you hear about
if you're entertaining thought.
You have to be fully present
in what you're doing.
And what happens when you
are consistently meditating
is that you develop this acumen.
It's like push-ups
for the brain.
And you then are the
master of the brain
rather than being its slave.
So I think that's
absolutely crucial.
Some of the other
practices that have
been integral and
really important for me
have been journaling.
I'm a big fan of The Artist's
Way, which is a program created
by Julia Cameron.
There's an amazing book.
And it's all about practices to
help you connect with yourself
and tap into your
creative voice.
But one of the key tools in
that program is something
called Morning Pages,
which is essentially
journaling in the
morning every day,
free form, without
editing anything,
to just kind of get out of
yourself and onto the page
whatever is happening in your
conscious and unconscious mind.
And what I've found
through many, many years
of doing this--
I've been doing it ever
since I got sober--
is that it really helps you
crystallize your thoughts
and it helps you get
very clear on what
it is that you are trying to
do so that you can organize
your energy and your
time and your resources
around the accomplishment of
that which is most key, most
important to you.
>> Well, you didn't miss
that point, then, did you?
You got it.
Back in late 2008, 2009,
after "Food Matters" had just
come out, coincidentally, I was
in the States traveling a bit.
And I'd go to these
festivals and people
would be like, oh my
god, how raw are you?
How vegan are you?
Like this and that,
and everyone was
sort of judging each other
about their status of veganism
or their status of raw foodism.
And I think still we've got
this legacy of nutritional dogma
associated with labeling diets.
How do you, being someone who's
adopted a plant-based diet,
how do you practice
being a spiritual person
and being nonjudgmental, or
not being a vegan police?
And there's a lot of vegan
bashing that happens, too.
How do you personally
balance that.
and how do you
approach that yourself?
>> With respect to my own
relationship with food,
or how I communicate
with other people?
>> Both.
I mean, a little bit
of both, but mostly
how you communicate
to other people.
>> Labels are not our friends.
And we are animals
that love our tribes,
and nobody likes to be on a
team more than a human being.
And we can get very caught
up in that, to our detriment,
I think.
I think we can all agree that
healthy eating is something
we're all interested in.
If anybody's watching
this show, they're
probably interested in that.
But my perspective
on it is to not get
caught up in these, whether
it's vegan, plant-based, raw,
high raw, low carb, high fat.
You know, all these
different labels,
I think serve more to
divide us than unite us.
I'm very conscious
and conscientious when
I communicate to try to
transcend the dogma associated
with these various categories.
And I think that
what happens when
we silo ourselves is
that we set ourselves up
for failure,
because we're trying
to adhere to some perfectionist
standard that none of us
can possibly adhere to,
because we're human beings
and we're fallible
by nature, right?
So when somebody says, I'm
going to be totally raw
or I'm going to be this or
that, and then a couple of weeks
in or a year in or a
month in, they slip up,
people tend to flog
themselves for that
and throw the baby
out with the bathwater
and say, this is too hard.
I can't possibly do this.
Everyone else seems to have
it figured out, but I don't.
And then they give up
and they retreat back
to their unhealthy,
old eating habits.
And that's not helping anybody.
So what I think is we have
to do the best that we can.
None of us is living a
zero-impact lifestyle.
You know, if somebody is vegan,
somebody else will say, yeah,
but if you're
eating vegan, do you
realize how many rodents
and bugs are churned up
when they plow the field?
It's like, yeah,
I get it, right?
We all have an impact that
we're trying to minimize here.
The point is we do
the best we can.
It is an aspiration.
We're all aspiring to be better.
What is the next best
choice that I can make?
And let's leave it at that.
And in terms of how I
communicate with other people,
my perspective is I'm
always wanting to fan
the flames of positive change.
If somebody makes one step
in the right direction,
I think it's worth celebrating
rather than chastising them
because they're not
doing it perfect,
or they overlook
this other thing.
Everybody's on their
own journey, right?
And if you discourage somebody
by telling them, well, yeah,
you kind of did
that, but you also
didn't do this, who's
gaining by that?
Only an insecure person will
try to take someone down a peg
because they didn't do it as
well as some idealized version.
So my perspective
is always to fan
the flames of positive
change, no matter
how small or incremental
those steps are.
That is how we make
our way forward,
by celebrating everyone
else who's out there who's
trying to do a little bit better
today than they did yesterday.
>> Beautiful.
I love it.
Tell me about these
extraordinary feats
that you hit after
this 40 years of age.
>> Went plant-based at age 40.
At age 42, I did
my first Ultraman
and I placed 11th overall.
2009, did my second Ultraman,
placed sixth overall.
2010, I did EPIC5, five Ironmans
on five Hawaiian islands in six
and a half days, at age 43.
This past year, I competed
in the OTILLO Swimrun World
Championships in Sweden, which
is a 10-hour ultra distance
swimrun competition
where you traipse across,
like, 50 islands spread
wide across the Stockholm
archipelago, and you
do it as a team of two.
I did it with my coach.
We were the fastest Americans.
I can't remember
what place we got.
Took us like 10 hours.
I did that at age 50.
So I'm still getting after it.
In 2012, my first book
came out, "Finding Ultra."
It's my memoir that
kind of tells my story.
And that has gone on to
sell quite a few copies.
I've got a brand
new version of that
that's coming out this March.
My wife and I wrote two
cookbooks in the wake of that,
"The Plant Power Way" and
"The Plant Power Way Italia,"
which is coming out in April.
And in 2012 I launched
"The Ritual" podcast,
which now has over
30 million downloads
and reaches people
all over the world.
They're longform
conversations with all kinds
of inspiring people across all
aspects of health, wellness,
fitness, entrepreneurship
and the like.
So it's been a crazy,
wild ride, and it all
started with changing my
relationship with food.
Just like you.
>> I love it.
That's perfect.
Fantastic.
Couldn't have been better.
So where I want to
finish with here
is going to be
interesting for you,
and I think you've touched
on it a little bit,
is around how to create a sort
of-- in this process you've
created for yourself a
greater sense of happiness
and fulfillment and
contentment than you
had when you were in your '30s.
And I don't know that that's
what you initially set out
to do.
You initially set out to
just get out of this haze
that you were in.
Reflecting on your
experience, what
is your little formula
that you've garnered
for happiness and fulfillment?
>> Here are the five steps
to happiness and fulfillment,
right?
[LAUGHS] Yeah.
>> How would you--
do you think there's
something to it?
I mean, you found a
passion, you found a calling
and you went after it?
I don't know.
How would you describe,
and how would you
help, if you had
to lecture people
about how to find
happiness and fulfillment,
what advice would you give them?
>> So the best advice that I
can give to somebody who is
searching for a greater purpose
and fulfillment in their life
is to ask them one question.
And that question
is, who are you?
Like, who are you really?
And resist the temptation to
provide just a flip answer.
This is my career,
this is what I do.
No, I'm talking about,
who are you really?
What is unique about you?
What is your specific,
unique blueprint and design?
What is it that you are
here to express and create
in your life?
What is it about you that
makes you uniquely you?
What gets you out of
bed in the morning,
excited about your life?
And I'm not suspecting
that everybody's
going to have an answer
to that immediately,
but I think exploration
of that inquiry
is the path forward to
ultimately living a more
purposeful, meaningful life.
Because if you can
identify that thing--
and it could be as
silly as, you know,
I like making
papier-mache birds,
or I want to tell
jokes on stage,
or I want to learn how
to play the guitar,
or I always wanted to
be an opera singer--
whatever it is.
It doesn't have to be some
crazy, big, romantic thing.
For me, it was simple as, I just
love jumping into a swimming
pool in the morning.
Or I love the feeling of
how the sun hits my shoulder
on a trail run at dawn.
Those were things I wanted
to have more of in my life.
Very simple, basic, ultimately
quite primal instincts.
And my path has been to just
express that more in my life
and it's led me to
all of these places.
So it doesn't have to be that
thing of, like, well, I'm just
going to quit my job overnight.
But I think the more
you can invest yourself
in that journey of
trying to identify
what it is that you are here to
do, that is the path forward.
And I think if you commit
yourself fully to that,
you will be amazed at
what transpires over time.
>> Beautiful.
Well answered, sir.
Very well done.
Final question here for you.
It's a big one.
I'm not sure you're
ready for it.
[LAUGHS]
So you're stepping
out onto a stage,
and someone hands
you a microphone.
And they're like, look, the
whole world is listening.
You've got two minutes.
What lesson would
you teach humanity?
>> Oh my god.
>> I mean, this is a big one.
I mean, you've distilled
a lot of your knowledge
into so many different things.
But what message would
you have for humanity?
It's a big deal.
>> My message to
humanity is twofold.
Take responsibility
for your own life,
and give of yourself
freely to others.
If you can take control
of your own path
and then devote
yourself in service
to the betterment of
other human beings,
you will find more fulfillment,
more purpose, more contentment,
and more happiness than
you can possibly imagine.
And that will be your gift
to humanity and to the planet
that we all share.
[THEME MUSIC]